docs: add section on prometheus.remote_write data retention (#5328)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/shared/wal-data-retention.md

---
aliases:
- /docs/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/integrations/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/shared/wal-data-retention/
description: Shared content, information about data retention in the WAL
headless: true
---

> The `prometheus.remote_write` component reuses the Prometheus Write-Ahead Log
> (WAL) implementation for resiliency against network outages and to avoid the
> prohibitively expensive in-memory buffering of all metric samples. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `prometheus.remote_write` component uses a Write Ahead Log (WAL) prevent data loss during network outages. The
```

Looking at Robert's comment above... what if we simplified the initial sentence down to this?  Do we need to mention buffering to memory (RAM)?  I don't think it adds a lot... unless I'm missing a detail here.

Author: Ok, doing this

---
aliases:
- /docs/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
- /docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/integrations/agent/shared/wal-data-retention/
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/shared/wal-data-retention/
description: Shared content, information about data retention in the WAL
headless: true
---

> The `prometheus.remote_write` component reuses the Prometheus Write-Ahead Log

Reviewer 2: nit: I'd drop the reference that we're reusing the Prometheus WAL, since that's an implementation detail that could change (even though it probably won't).

(WAL) implementation for resiliency against network outages and to avoid the
prohibitively expensive in-memory buffering of all metric samples. The

> component buffers the received metrics on-disk, in a WAL per configured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
component buffers the received metrics on-disk, in a WAL for each configured
```

Reviewer: Isn't the on-disk for the WAL implied? Or can it also be configured/used for.. buffering to RAM (for example)?  Do we need to state "on-disk"?

Author: No, it's always on-disk. I wanted to mention the "on-disk" detail at least once in this document in case a reader didn't know. I can leave the reference on the next paragraph and remove this.

endpoint. The queue shards can use the WAL after the network outage is resolved
and flush the buffered metrics to the endpoints.

> The WAL records metrics in 128MB-files called segments. To avoid having a WAL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WAL records metrics in 128 MB files called segments. To avoid having a WAL
```

that grows on-disk indefinitely, the component _truncates_ its segments on a
set interval.

On each truncation, the WAL deletes references to series that are no longer
present and also _checkpoints_ roughly the oldest two thirds of the segments

> written to it. A checkpoint means that the WAL only keeps track of the unique

Reviewer 2: What does "roughly" mean in this context? It's exactly 2/3rds of segment files, rounded down to the nearest integer :)

Reviewer: Same point for line 66.... there we have it saying "approximately 2/3rds. Do we need to be more explicit and state 2/3rds rounded down?

Author: A weasel word to escape describing the calculation 😅  will rephrase this.

identifier for each existing metrics series, and deletes the actual samples
associated with it. If that data has not yet been pushed to remote_write, it is

> lost.

Author: Ok, rephrasing to

```
A checkpoint means that the WAL only keeps track of the unique
identifier for each existing metrics series, and can no longer use the samples
for remote writing. If that data has not yet been pushed to the remote
endpoint, it is lost.
```

This behavior dictates the data retention for the `prometheus.remote_write`

> component. It also means that it is not possible to directly correlate data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
component. It also means that it is impossible to directly correlate data
```

retention directly to the data age itself, as the truncation logic works on
_segments_, not the samples themselves. This makes data retention less
predictable when the component receives a non-consistent rate of data.

> The [wal block][] (in Flow mode) or the [metrics config][] (in static mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [WAL block][] in Flow mode, or the [metrics config][] in Static mode
```

contain some configurable parameters that can be used to control the tradeoff

> between memory usage, disk usage and data retention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between memory usage, disk usage, and data retention.
```

> The `truncate_frequency/wal_truncate_frequency` parameter configures the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `truncate_frequency` or `wal_truncate_frequency` parameter configures the
```

interval at which truncations happen. A lower value leads to reduced memory
usage, but also provides less resiliency to long outages.

When a WAL clean-up starts, the lowest successfully sent timestamp is used to
determine how much data is safe to remove from the WAL.
The `min_keepalive_time/min_wal_time` controls the minimum age of samples

> considered for removal; no samples more recent than `min_keepalive_time` are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
considered for removal. No samples more recent than `min_keepalive_time` are
```

> removed. The `max_keepalive_time/max_wal_time` controls the maximum age of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
removed. The `max_keepalive_time` or `max_wal_time` controls the maximum age of
```

> samples that can be kept in the WAL; samples older than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
samples that can be kept in the WAL. Samples older than
```

`max_keepalive_time` are forcibly removed.

### In cases of `remote_write` outages

> When the remote write endpoint is unreachable over a period of time, the lowest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the remote write endpoint is unreachable over a period of time, the lowest
```

Reviewer: What does "lowest" mean here? The most recent?

> successfully sent timestamp is not updated. In that case, only the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
successfully sent timestamp is not updated. The
```

`min_keepalive_time` and `max_keepalive_time` arguments control the age range
of data kept in the WAL.

If the remote write outage is longer than the `max_keepalive_time` parameter,

> then the WAL is truncated and the oldest data is lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then the WAL is truncated, and the oldest data is lost.
```

### In cases of intermittent `remote_write` outages

> In case the remote write endpoint is intermittently reachable, the lowest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the remote write endpoint is intermittently reachable, the lowest
```

Reviewer: What does "lowest" mean here?

> succesfully sent timestamp is updated whenever the connection is successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
successfully sent timestamp is updated whenever the connection is successful.
```

> This updates the series' comparison with `min_keepalive_time` and triggers a

Reviewer: What does the update? Is it when the connection succeeds?  Something along these lines?

```
A successful connection updates the series' comparison with...```
```

> truncation on the `truncate_frequency` interval which will checkpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
truncation on the `truncate_frequency` interval which checkpoints
```

approximately two thirds of the data written since the previous truncation.

### In cases of falling behind

> In case the queue shards cannot flush data quickly enough to keep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the queue shards cannot flush data quickly enough to keep
```

up-to-date with the most recent data buffered in the WAL, we say that the
component is 'falling behind'.

> It's not unusual for the component to fall behind 2 or 3 scrape intervals
> temporarily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's not unusual for the component to temporarily fall behind 2 or 3 scrape intervals.
```

> If the component falls behind more than 1/3rd of the data written since the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the component falls behind more than one third of the data written since the
```

last truncate interval, it is possible for the truncate loop to checkpoint data

> before they've had a chance to be pushed to the remote_write endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before being pushed to the remote_write endpoint.
```

> [wal block]: {{< relref "../flow/reference/components/prometheus.remote_write.md/#wal-block" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WAL block]: {{< relref "../flow/reference/components/prometheus.remote_write.md/#wal-block" >}}
```
